3.Different types of server ?
Web,Application,Data , File 
1️⃣ Web Server (HTTP,HTTS,Frontend,HTML,CSS,JS)



What it does: Handles HTTP/HTTPS requests
Serves: HTML, CSS, JS, images
Examples:
Apache
Nginx
IIS
Example use: Serves your React frontend


2️⃣ Application Server (business,Apis,Authentication,Node.js, MERN backend )



What it does: Runs business logic
Serves: APIs, authentication, processing
Examples:
Node.js (Express, Nest)
Java Spring Boot
Example use: Your Express backend in MERN

3️⃣ Database Server (store and manage,)

What it does: Stores and manages data
Examples:
MongoDB
MySQL
PostgreSQL
Example use: MongoDB storing users, properties, orders


4.File Server  (store and share,FTP,)

What it does: Stores and shares files
Examples:
FTP Server
AWS S3
Example use: Image uploads, documents





4.server vs database ?


1. What is a Server?(recive and send response)



✅ Definition
A server is a computer/system that receives requests and sends responses over a network.




✅ What it does (Handle,Logic,Access data,)



Handles client requests (browser, mobile app)
Runs application logic
Controls access to data
Communicates with databases

Client → Server → Response

2. What is a Database?
✅ Definition (system ,store , organizes,manage )

A database is a system that stores, organizes, and manages data.


✅ Examples
MongoDB
MySQL
PostgreSQL

Server → Database → Data

User (Browser)
   ↓
Server (Node + Express)
   ↓
Database (MongoDB)





5. tree tier (software desing, separate layers,Presentation,Application,Data) 

Three-tier architecture is a software design pattern where an application is divided into three separate layers, each with a specific responsibility.

User (Browser)
   ↓
Presentation Tier (React)
   ↓
Application Tier (Node + Express)
   ↓
Data Tier (MongoDB)



7.what is api (set of rules and endpoints,two,communicate)

API (Application Programming Interface) is a set of rules and endpoints that allows two applications to communicate with each other.



8.What is rest api ?

Rest api vs normal api
REST = Representational State Transfer

A REST API is an architectural style that allows client and server to communicate using HTTP methods and JSON in a stateless way.

REST → How you design API URLs & methods


what is  crud operation ?

CRUD operation means the four basic things you do with data in any application.

CRUD = Create, Read, Update, Delete

These are the core database operations.


9.Difference between put and patch request.

PUT replaces the entire resource, while PATCH updates only specific fields of a resource.

10.what is req in server ? 

req is the request object that contains all data sent from the client to the server, such as params, query, body, and headers.


11.what is res different types of response? 

In a server (Express / backend), a response is what the server sends back to the client after processing a request.

1️⃣ Text / Plain response
res.send('Server is running');

2️⃣ JSON response (MOST COMMON)
res.json({
  success: true,
  data: users
});

3️⃣ HTML response
res.send('<h1>Welcome</h1>');

4️⃣ Status code response
res.status(404).send('Not Found');

5️⃣ Redirect response
res.redirect('/login');



12.what is node.js ?
Node.js is a JavaScript runtime environment that allows you to run JavaScript outside the browser, mainly on the server.

👉 Before Node.js, JavaScript could only run in browsers.
👉 With Node.js, JavaScript can run on servers, build APIs, handle databases, etc.


12.1.what is runtime ?

A runtime is the environment that executes your code.

It provides:

Engine to run the language

Memory management

Access to system resources (file system, network)

13.what is single threated and non-blocking why node.js is single threated .

14.what is event-driven architechture ?

Event-Driven Architecture is a design pattern where the flow of a system is driven by events.

👉 An event = something that happens
Example: user clicks a button, order placed, payment completed

Instead of components calling each other directly, they react to events.



16.how node.js run using v8 engine .


17.why should we use node.js? 

18.when we should not use node.js


19.what is express.js 

Express.js is a lightweight web framework for Node.js used to build web servers and REST APIs easily and quickly.

👉 It sits on top of Node.js and simplifies handling:



19.1 Why should you learn Express.js?
🔥 Practical reasons

Build real backend APIs

Core part of MERN stack

Used in almost every Node.js project

Industry standard

Easy to learn


20.what is express middleware ?

Express middleware is a function that runs between the request (req) and the response (res) in an Express.js app.

👉 It can read, modify, stop, or pass the request before it reaches the final route.

Client → Middleware → Route → Response

19.2   Why middleware is needed

Middleware is used for:

Authentication

Authorization

Logging

Parsing data

Error handling

CORS


21.Types of database 

22. What  is Database Mangement system ?

A Database Management System (DBMS) is software that helps you store, organize, and manage data in a structured way. It allows users and applications to create, read, update, and delete data efficiently.

In simple terms:

DBMS = Software that manages your data and makes it easy to access and manipulate.

23.What is  SQl ?

1️⃣ SQL Databases (Relational DB)

SQL = Structured Query Language

Data stored in tables (rows & columns)

Schema is fixed (you must define structure before inserting data)

Use SQL queries to interact

Features

Relational (tables linked by relationships)

Strong consistency

ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability)

Examples

MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server


23.1 What is NOSQl ?

2️⃣ NoSQL Databases (Non-relational)

Data stored in flexible formats (JSON documents, key-value, graphs, column stores)

Schema-less (can store different fields in each record)

Often horizontal scalable for large data

Features

Flexible schema

Can handle large, unstructured data

Eventual consistency (depends on DB)

Fast for specific queries

Examples

MongoDB (document-based)

Redis (key-value)

Cassandra (column-based)

24.Types of nosql database  ?

1️⃣ Document-Based Database

Stores data as documents (usually JSON or BSON)

Each document can have different fields

Great for apps with flexible or hierarchical data

Examples: MongoDB, CouchDB


2️⃣ Key-Value Database

Stores data as key-value pairs

Extremely fast for lookup by key

Good for caching and session storage

Examples: Redis, DynamoDB, Riak

"user:123": { "name": "Rayhan", "email": "rayhan@gmail.com" }

3️⃣ Column-Based (Wide-Column) Database

Stores data in columns instead of rows

Efficient for analytical queries on large datasets

Often used in Big Data applications

Examples: Cassandra, HBase

Row Key: 1
Columns: name=Rayhan, email=rayhan@gmail.com, role=user

4️⃣ Graph Database

Stores data as nodes and edges

Great for relationships (social networks, recommendations)

Queries follow connections between data

Examples: Neo4j, ArangoDB, Amazon Neptune

(Rayhan)-[:FRIEND]->(Sara)
(Rayhan)-[:BOUGHT]->(Property1)



25.when we should use no sql and when sql  ?

✅ When to use SQL

Structured data

Tables with fixed schema, like users, products, transactions.

Complex queries / Joins

When you need to combine multiple tables frequently.

ACID transactions required

Banking apps, payment systems, booking systems.

Stable schema

Data structure doesn’t change often.

Examples:

Banking systems

E-commerce order management

ERP systems

✅ When to use NoSQL

Unstructured or semi-structured data

JSON, documents, logs, chat messages, multimedia.

Flexible schema / Rapid development

You can add new fields anytime without altering the entire database.

High scalability / Big Data

Handle millions of users, high-speed writes, horizontal scaling.

Event-driven / real-time applications

Chat apps, social media feeds, IoT apps, notifications.

Examples:

MongoDB for MERN apps (users, properties, reviews)

Redis for caching or sessions

Cassandra for analytical data

Neo4j for social networks / recommendations